Home News Countries Investigations InDepth About Us tw-icon fb-icon in-icon
Español Search Investigation and Analysis of Organized Crime YOUR SEARCH The
most extensive database on organized crime in the Americas InSight Crime
SECTION SEARCH SEARCH Thu, Sep 3, 2020 Home News Countries Investigations
InDepth About Us tw-icon fb-icon in-icon Español Home News Analysis ‘PCC and
Brazil Government Engaged in Game of Chess,’ says Expert ‘PCC and Brazil
Government Engaged in Game of Chess,’ says Expert Analysis Written by Escrito
por Angela Olaya and Josefina Salomón* - July 22, 2020 BrazilParaguayPCCTriple
Frontier With around 30,000 members, the PCC is Brazil's strongest gang
SHAREThe PCC has become one of the most complex and important criminal
organizations within Latin America, with over 30,000 members in Brazil, an
active presence in Paraguay and drug trafficking tendrils around the world. It
achieved this by sticking to a core ideology, preferring collaboration instead
of confrontation, according to Bruno Paes Manso, a journalist and researcher
at the University of São Paulo who co-wrote a book, “The War – PCC’s Rise and
the World of Crime in Brazil,” charting the rise to power of Brazil’s largest
gang. InSight Crime spoke with Paes Manso about the First Capital Command’s
(Primeiro Comando da Capital — PCC) model of “criminal cooperation,” which has
been effective in Brazil and could power its international expansion. SEE
ALSO: Brazil News and Profile InSight Crime (IC): How much of the PCC’s power
has come from coopting responsibilities that traditionally belong to the
State, such as keeping order within prisons? Bruno Paes Manso (BPM): The
prison system is very overcrowded in São Paulo, for example. Two years ago, I
entered a cell with space for 12 people but it held 50 prisoners, with all
their belongings, and just one bathroom. There is also not enough food or
clothing for all prisoners. Those who can organize this chaos become crucial
and the State cannot do it. The PCC enters the prisons and can ensure (some
form) of justice and equality between the prisoners. They help manage this
chaos, which could explode at any time. But authorities know how to set
certain limits. There seem to be agreements but there is also a lot of
tension. It is like a chess game between the two sides. IC: This strategy
appears to have been extremely successful, given the group’s expansion and
control over its members. Could the PCC provide a criminal business model for
other groups to follow? BPM: Yes, as the drug trafficking market is highly
lucrative. As a business model, the strongest element which could be
replicated elsewhere was the creation of strict criminal protocols that are
respected in order to maximize earnings. That is the PCC’s strength: create
order in an informal, illegal market that by its very nature is usually
chaotic. IC: As well as taking over spaces abandoned by the State? BPM: Yes,
but there are elements to bear in mind. Even in poor neighborhoods, the State
must be present providing education and healthcare. Drug trafficking offers a
career path and a very seductive “identity” to young men. It offers them a
“warrior” form of masculinity, which the State must contend with. The trick is
how to convince these young people differently. How do we let them build their
dreams outside of drug trafficking? How can we enter this crisis and build a
context which opens doors for these people? IC: How much money has the PCC
been able to earn in recent years? BPM: The last good estimate, which I think
was from 2016, spoke of around 200 million reais per year, which is close to
$40 million. This is still very low compared to the earnings of larger
cartels. But it is very important to understand the difference between the
PCC, as an organization, and the enormous network of PCC members, who earn
money on their own and pay a monthly fee to the group. This is the difference
that sets it apart from the cartels. The cartels act more as a company and
their earnings are tallied up as they would be within a large corporation. The
PCC is a network of partners who can earn their own money and then dedicate
resources toward the costs of the group’s inner workings. IC: This level of
earnings and operations is revealing about the PCC’s capacity for negotiation
and diplomacy. BPM: Yes, it certainly provides a more regimented approach to
the drug trafficking market. Its drug sellers are trained to sell drugs, for
example. This helps to pacify drug trafficking as it becomes a win-win for all
sides. The market helps to ensure violence isn’t necessary. Creating order has
long been the PCC’s goal: earn more money, reinvest it and expand its contacts
and opportunities. So those $40 million dollars are earned annually in
exchange for investing in the rights of its members, in lawyers, in the
families of prisoners, in everything it does to ensure the PCC keeps
functioning. IC: Has this format of cooperation, which pays attention to the
needs of its members while granting them economic autonomy, helped the PCC
avoid fragmentation? BPM: The strength of the PCC is the intelligence of its
structure. If a leader dies, the group continues. The death or incarceration
of any one member doesn’t have a major impact because the structure is strong.
It is like a cooperative of partners helping each other out. And as a
cooperative, there is a concentration of resources used to invest in the
rights of those partners, while granting them greater flexibility than other
criminal groups. SEE ALSO: First Capital Command (PCC) Profile IC: The PCC has
succeeded in establishing a presence in Paraguay. Can you describe this wing
of the group in comparison to those operating in Brazil? BPM: Their presence
in Paraguay is an increasingly important strategic step. When the group
expanded there, the PCC had access to large volumes of drugs. The big problem
with microtrafficking in Brazil is that selling small amounts of drugs to the
consumer can lead to a lot of violence and death. But when the PCC accessed
large volumes of drugs, things changed. It stopped having so many problems on
the streets, its sales became much more lucrative. For this reason, the PCC’s
relations with its partners in Paraguay are very strategic. IC: There have
been recent reports about the PCC buying properties to produce marijuana in
Paraguay. How much focus do you think the PCC is placing in gaining control of
drug production? BPM: I don’t think their strategy in terms of marijuana in
Paraguay is to buy property and be large landowners. They want to invest in
publicly available land so that if authorities try and identify who owns the
marijuana production, the plantations cannot be associated to a specific
person. That is commonplace when it comes to marijuana production in Paraguay.
People plant in plots of land that cannot be linked to a specific name or
person. The PCC is not buying land directly, it is investing in plantations
and financing large loans [to develop production]. The group is acting more
like a capital investor, collaborating with the people who work the land.
There are people in Paraguay who know the country’s criminal landscape, the
PCC sees these opportunities and provides them with capital. This fits with
the PCC’s business model. And the PCC’s participation in marijuana production
in Paraguay appeared as it expanded in the country. The group discovered
opportunities to develop, which could benefit their drug trafficking business
in Brazil. IC: What effect could this have on drug routes in the region and
their relationship with other criminal groups? BPM: That is difficult to say.
Looking at the PCC as a business, there are always routes that allow for the
distribution of drugs into Brazil. If these are stable, it does not need to
expand. But if the PCC sees opportunities to create new routes, access new
markets and increase earnings, it will absolutely seize them. IC: What has the
government done to stop the PCC and how effective have they been? BPM: Brazil
has many people in jail and not enough space for them all. The PCC arrived to
organize and reduce the number of deaths in prisons. The group succeeded in
reducing the amount of problems there, so it became very important for keeping
a balance in the prison system. The challenge for the state is maintaining
that balance. SEE ALSO: PCC’s Rapid Expansion Topic of Debate at InSight Crime
Conference IC: The relationship between the PCC and the State is very
delicate, then? BPM: Yes, because while the PCC manages the prisons, which is
good for the government since it means the prison system won’t implode, the
PCC has grown within prisons over the last 20 years. They have developed
certain freedoms on how to do business within that system. There is a certain
tolerance but also limits that cannot be crossed. There’s a fine balance
between the two sides. The state does not allow this situation to exist,
exactly. The PCC is very creative and finds ways to circumvent the limits set
upon them. Authorities also has many other problems, there aren’t any
resources, there isn’t enough police intelligence, etc. IC: Given this
evolution that you’ve described and the future of the PCC, do you think the
group has reached its full potential as an organization? BPM: There are
further possibilities for expansion because the gang has a very flexible
structure that is not about competition. The intelligent aspect of their
structure is their quest for partnerships. The PCC offers its services to drug
traffickers so they can sell more. They don’t compete for markets, they build
distribution networks of partners so that everyone can sell more drugs. This
structure is smart because it’s flexible, horizontal and has a strong base
inside prisons. IC: Thinking about the possible future of the PCC, will the
group be able to expand its operations even more? BPM: The PCC, like other
criminal groups, knows that controlling territory comes with very large and
costly problems. To control a marijuana plantation in Paraguay, for example,
you have to know the locals, their traditions, the police, and you have to
have relationships with local institutions. It’s a very expensive investment
that doesn’t make sense. It doesn’t make sense that a group of people from the
favelas of São Paulo can come to have relationships in a foreign territory
with foreign people. I don’t think the organization has ambitions like that.
*This interview was edited for clarity and brevity. SHARE What are your
thoughts? Click here to send InSight Crime your comments. We encourage readers
to copy and distribute our work for non-commercial purposes, provided that it
is attributed to InSight Crime in the byline, with a link to the original at
both the top and bottom of the article. Check the Creative Commons website for
more details of how to share our work, and please send us an email if you use
an article. 'PCC and Brazil Government Engaged in Game of Chess,' says Expert
Name Email Comment × TAGSBrazilParaguayPCCTriple Frontier Chris Dalby RELATED
ARTICLESPCC’s Rapid Expansion Topic of Debate at InSight Crime ConferenceSão
Paulo, Paraguay and Beyond: The PCC’s Growing PowerBrazil Fighting Pesticide
Smuggling War on Two FrontsCapture of Levi Felicio on the Brazil-Paraguay
Border Raises UncertaintiesPolice Links to Drug Trafficking Endemic in
Paraguay SubScribe to Receive InSight Crime's Top Stories Weekly SubScribe to
Receive InSight Crime’s Top Stories Weekly Investigation and Analysis of
Organized Crime Creative Commons Attribution - Noncommercial 3.0 Unported
License.See Privacy Policy Home News Countries Investigations InDepth About Us
tw-icon fb-icon in-icon Español Home News Countries Investigations InDepth
About Us tw-icon fb-icon in-icon Español ©


